Peter Parkerfinds himself struggling to
balance his civilian life with his superhero
life asSpider-Man: he faces employment,
financial, and academic trouble, is estranged
from both his love interestMary Jane Watson,
who continues to pine for him and his best
friendHarry Osborn, who blames Spider-Man
for his fatherNorman Osborn's death and
discovers that hisAunt Mayis facingeviction.
He also finds himself suffering temporary,
but recurring losses of his powers, often
in life-threatening situations.
Harry, who is now head ofOscorp's genetic
and scientific research division, is sponsoring
afusion powerproject by nuclear scientistOtto
Octavius, who befriends and mentors Peter
after Harry introduces him. While handling
hazardous materials, Octavius wears a harness
of powerfulrobotic tentacle armswithartificial
intelligence. During a public demonstration
that Peter and Harry attend, a power spike
causes the fusion reactor to destabilize.
Octavius refuses to shut down the reactor
despite the increasing instability and it
goes critical, killing his wife Rosalie, fusing
the harness to his spine, and burning the
inhibitor chip blocking the arms from his
nervous system. Peter, as Spider-Man, shuts
the experiment down, destroying it in the
process. At a hospital, doctors prepare to
surgically remove Octavius' harness; however,
without the inhibitor chip, the now-sentient
arms defend themselves by attacking and killing
the staff. Upon regaining consciousness and
seeing the carnage, Octavius escapes and takes
refuge at a harbor. Becoming increasingly
influenced by the arms' AI, he decides to
re-try his experiment. He robs a bank to fund
a second experiment. Peter and May coincidentally
are there, and Octavius takes May hostage.
Peter rescues her, but Octavius flees with
the stolen money. TheDaily Buglesubsequently
dubs the scientist Doctor Octopus.
Mary Jane finds success as aBroadwayactress
and becomes engaged toastronautJohn Jameson,
the son ofBugleeditorJ. Jonah Jameson,
while Harry devastated and embarassed over
losing millions of dollars following Otto's
failed experiment, ends up further straining
his relationship with Peter. Peter suffers
an emotional breakdown over his inability
to balance his life and loses his powers.
He quits being Spider-Man, returns to his
normal life, and unsuccessfully attempts to
reconcile with Mary Jane. A garbageman brings
Peter's costume to Jameson, who takes credit
for driving Spider-Man into hiding. Peter
tells May the truth behind hisuncle Ben's
death and how he is responsible. May forgives
him, but the rise inNew York City's crimerates
worries Peter.
Meanwhile, requiring the isotopetritiumto
fuel his reactor, Octavius visits Harry to
demand it. Harry agrees in exchange for Spider-Man.
He tells Octavius to seek Peter, whom Harry
believes is friends with Spider-Man, but tells
Octavius not to harm him. Octavius locates
Peter, tells him to find Spider-Man, and captures
Mary Jane. Her endangerment leads to Peter's
powers returning. As Jameson admits that he
was wrong about Spider-Man, Peter steals his
costume back from theBugleand goes after
Octavius. As Peter battles Octavius, they
fall onto aNew York City Subwaytrain.
Octavius sabotages the controls and leaves
Peter to save the passengers, which he does
at a great physical toll. When he faints from
exhaustion, the grateful passengers save him
from falling and bring him into the train,
seeing his unmasked face but promising to
keep their knowledge hidden. They unsuccessfully
try to protect him when Octavius returns to
capture Peter, whom Octavius delivers to Harry.
After giving Octavius the tritium, Harry prepares
to kill Spider-Man, only to be shocked to
see Peter under the mask. Peter convinces
Harry to direct him to Octavius' lair, as
bigger things are at stake.
As Peter arrives at the doctor's waterfront
laboratory and attempts to rescue Mary Jane
discreetly, Octavius discovers him, and they
battle as the nuclear reaction swells and
starts threatening the city. Peter ultimately
subdues Octavius, reveals his identity, and
persuades Octavius to let his dream go for
the greater good. Octavius commands the tentacles
to obey him, and sacrifices himself to destroy
the experiment. Mary Jane sees Peter's true
identity and feelings, which he says is why
they cannot be together. Peter returns Mary
Jane to John, and leaves.
Meanwhile, Harry is visited by a vision of
his fatherNormanin a mirror, pleading
for Harry to avenge his death. Enraged and
reluctant to hurt his friend, Harry shatters
the mirror, inadvertently revealing a secret
room containing prototypes of theGreen Goblin's
equipment. On her wedding day, Mary Jane abandons
John at the altar and runs to Peter's apartment,
telling Peter that she is willing to accept
the risks of being in a relationship with
him and that she loves him. After they kiss,
they hear police sirens, and Mary Jane encourages
him to go help as Spider-Man.